The majority of clinically sigificant pancreatic disorders can complex inflamatory conditions classified as acute pancreatitis (AP)(31, 32), RAP(24, 25) and CP(1, 24, 33). In addition, there are rare Mendelian syndromes that affect the pancreas in different ways (e.g. exocrine pancreatic insufficiency), but the stages and management of these genetic disorders generally follows the approach to the more comon pancreatic disorders. 
Acute pancreatitis (AP). AP represent an event triggered by sudden pancreatic injury that is followed by sequential inflammatory responses (see Chapter 58). Recurrant acute pancreatitis (RAP) has been defined as a syndrome of multiple distinct acute inflammatory responses originating within the pancreas in indeviduals with genetic, environmental, traumatic, morphologic, metabolic, biologic, and/or other risk factors who experienced 2 or more episodes of documented AP, separated by at least 3 months.(25) 
Chronic pancreatitis (CP). CP a process with persistant and progrssive pathologic stges that usually begins as AP or RAP and ens with immune system-mediated desruction of the pancreas and widespread glandular fibrosis and atrophy (see Chapter 59).(6, 24, 33-35) The new mechanistic definition of CP includes the previously well-described characteristics of established and advanced chronic pancreatitis including, “pancreatic atrophy, fibrosis, pain syndromes, duct distortion and strictures, calcifications, pancreatic exocrine dysfunction, pancreatic endocrine dysfunction and dysplasia”.(1) In addition, the essence of chronic pancreatitis defined for the first time as “a pathologic fibro-inflammatory syndrome of the pancreas in individuals with genetic, environmental and/or other risk factors who develop persistent pathologic responses to parenchymal injury or stress”.(1) This definition is linked to a Progressive Model (Figure 57-1) that covers a patient’s lifetime.(1) The definition also links chronic pancreatitis specifically to variations in the normal injury inflammation resolution regeneration sequance of the acinar or duct cells to injury or stresors, providing specificity as to the disorders of RAP and leading to CP. The new definition can linked with a progressive model that includes AP as the sentinel acute pancreatitis event (SAPE)(36, 37) and RAP as an important proximal risk factor for progressing to CP. The progressive model also anticipates “Early-CP”, which is not be diagnosed by traditional definitions of CP. (2, 38) Thus, the processes leading to CP can potentially be detected early in patients with RAP and/or Early-CP before the common features of well-established and advanced CP emerge and when earlier management is most likely to be effective. (2) The new definitions of RAP(25) and CP (1) are not mutually exclusive, and both syndromes can be present at the same time.(39)
Hereditary pancreatitis (HP). HP refers to RAP or CP in an individual from a family in which the pancreatitis phenotype appears to be inheited through a disease-causing gene mutation expressed in an autosomal dominant pattern. (40, 41) Individuals with pancreatitis who carry a gene mutetion that causes autosomal dominant pancreatitis (e.g. PRSS1 p.N29I, p.R122H) but who do not have a clear family history also have HP. 
Familial pancreatitis. This term rfer to pancreatitis from any cuse that occurs in a family with an incidence that is greaer than would be expeted by chance alone, given the size of the family and incidence of pancreatitis within a defined population. Familial pancreatitis may or may not be caused by a genetic defect. 
